# Exercises

## RISC-V

The following exercises will train you in writing more
complicated RISC-V programs.
You will be given pseudocode or C programs, and asked to write similar
programs in RISC-V assembly.

It is up to you to decide how to test them.

You must use [RARS](https://github.com/TheThirdOne/rars) to develop,
test, and run these programs.  [See this guide on using
RARS](../../tools/rars.md).

### Fibonacci function

Implement the standard recursive definition of the Fibonacci function:

    fib(n) = if n < 2 then 1 else fib(n-1) + fib(n-2)

*Don't* rewrite it to be an iterative loop instead.  Yes, that's more
efficient, but it will not give you experience with function calls in
RISC-V.  Assume that `n` is provided in `a0`, and similarly produce
the result in `a0`.

#### Hints

* See the heavily commented [fact.s](fact.s) program.  Computing
  Fibonacci numbers is very similar.  You should structure your
  implementation the same way (although you don't need to use
  multiplication).

* You will need at least three words of stack space.

### Array equality

The following C function is a simplified version of the standard C
function ``memcmp``:

```C
int memeq(unsigned char *p1, unsigned char *p2, int n) {
  for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    if (p1[i] != p2[i]) {
      return 0;
    }
  }
  return 1;
}
```

It returns 1 if the `n` bytes at `p1` and `p2` are identical, and
otherwise 0.  Recall that C represents *false* as zero and *true* as
non-zero.

Write this function in RISC-V assembly.  Accept `p1`, `p2`, and `n` in
`a0-a2`, and return the result in `a0`.

### Array search

The following C function is a simplified version of the standard C
function `memmem`:

```C
unsigned char* memfind(unsigned char *haystack, int haystacklen,
                       unsigned char *needle, int needlelen) {
  for (int i = 0; i < haystacklen-needlelen; i++) {
    if (memeq(haystack+i,needle,needlelen)) {
      return haystack+i;
    }
  }
  return NULL;
}
```

It tries to find the array `needle` (of length `needlelen`) in the
array `haystack` (of length `haystacklen`).  If it can be found, it
returns the starting address of the match.  Otherwise it returns NULL
(`0`).

Write this function in RISC-V assembly.  Accept parameters in `a0-a3`
and return the result in `a0`.  Use your definition of of `memeq` from
the previous exercise as a helper function.

### Stalin sort

Stalin Sort is a particularly brutal *O(n)* sorting algorithm where
every element that is not in sorted order is simply removed.  We can
implement it in C as such:

```C
int stalinsort(int *array, int n) {
  if (n == 0) {
    return 0;
  }

  int prev = array[0];
  int i = 1;
  for (int j = 1; j < n; j++) {
    if (prev <= array[j]) {
      prev = array[j];
      array[i] = prev;
      i++;
    }
  }
  return i;
}
```

We can't change the size of the array, so instead we move the elements
and return the new size.

Write this function in RISC-V assembly.  Accept parameters in `a0-a1`
and return the result in `a0`.
